Design document for variable mutability and namespacing (#469)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: exploration/variable-mutability.md

  > ```
  > let $foo = {$foo :text-transform transform=uppercase}
  > let $foo = {$foo :trim}
  > let $foo = {$foo :sanitize target=html}
  > ```
  >
  > This can also be achieved by renaming:
  >
  > ```
  > let $foo1 = {$foo :text-transform transform=uppercase}
  > let $foo2 = {$foo1 :trim}
  > let $foo3 = {$foo2 :sanitize target=html}
  > ```
- Users want to impose typing on (we say "annotate") external variables
  or literals:
  > ```
  > let $fooAsNumber = {$foo :number}
  > let $anotherNumber = {42 :number}
  > ```
- Users may wish to provide complex annotations which are reused across mulitple patterns

  > ```
  > let $count = {$count :number}
  > let $date = {$date :datetime dateStyle=long}
  > match {$count}
  > when 1 {You received one message on {$date}}
  > when * {You received {$count} messages on {$date}}
  > ```

- Implementers need to know what value is associated with a named variable, see #299.

## Requirements

_What properties does the solution have to manifest to enable the use-cases above?_

- Be able to re-annotate variables without having to rename them in the message body

> - Allow static analysis to detect mistakes when referencing an undefined local variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think this should be considered as a requirement. At best it's a nice-to-have feature improving static analysis when a single translated message needs to be considered in isolation, and not with respect to its form in the source locale.

Author: Would you prefer a use case for this? This specific list was taken from @stam's comment in #310 near the end (after I had written a longer and more detailed set of requirements). The "static analysis" requirement is kind of "boiling down" the question of whether people will make mistakes with overwriting.

- Be able to re-annotate variables multiple times (because we do not allow nesting)

- _more needed?_

## Constraints

_What prior decisions and existing conditions limit the possible design?_

- Variable names are potentially contrained by `Nmtoken`.
  The reason we chose Nmtoken (and Name) was to maximize compatibility with (potential)
  LDML constructs, since CLDR uses XML.
  The "carve out" for various sigils doesn't conflict with naming in LDML currently and
  future conflicts are under our (CLDR-TC's) control.

## Proposed Design

_Describe the proposed solution. Consider syntax, formatting, errors, registry, tooling, interchange._

Separate local variables from externally passed values by altering the sigil
and by using a visually distinctive pattern for local names
(in an effort to prevent `$foo`/`@foo` confusion).

```abnf
variable     = local_var / external_var

> local_var    = "@_" name

Reviewer: Yeah, no. We categorically do not need any two-character prefixes.

Author: See later discussion. This is horrifying while we agree on something...

external_var = "$" name
```

> _Example_
>
> ```
> let @_local = {$external :transform}
> let @_anotherLocalVar = {|Some literal| :annotated}
> ```

To allow users to perform multiple annotations on a value,
while still allowing detection of unintentional reassignment,
introduce a new keyword `modify`:

```abnf
declaration = (let / modify) s variable [s] "=" [s] expression
...
modify = %6D.%6F.%64.%69.%66.%79
```

It is a syntax error to use `let` on a variable that has been previously
assigned through any declaration (either `let` or `modify`)

It is a variable resolution error to call `modify`
on an external variable that does not exist.

> _Example_
>
> ```
> let @_local = {$external :transform}
> modify @_local = {@_local :modification with=options}

> > modify $external = {$external :transform adding=annotation}

Reviewer: This looks an awful lot like we're doing pass-by-reference for formatting function arguments and we're modifying the `$external` value in the calling context. Is that intentional?

Author: It intentionally **_looks like_** it is modifying the value. In practice, it (probably) does not have write access to the external value and is only masking it for the duration of this message. But the idea is that the value is mutable only if you are consciously mutating it.

Note that we could disallow `modify` to externals, that is, you have to either `let` or `modify` a local variable in order to annotate an external var.

> ```

When more than one `modify` declaration applies to the same named variable,
or when a `modify` declaration is applied to a local variable
defined in a `let` declaration,
the named variable behaves as if each declaration were called
in the sequence in which they appear in the message.
Implementations are not required (by this design, anyway)
to resolve values in a greedy manner.
They might not resolve a value unless it is actually used in a selector
or in a placeholder.

#### Sigil Choice for Local Variables

The choice here of `@_` as the local variable sigil is probably not distinctive enough.
It is probably okay to be a little inconvenient with local variable naming
as these are less common than external variables.
Alternatives to consider:

- `@@foo`
- `@foo@`
- `@!foo`

> - `@ONLY_UPPER_ASCII_SNAKE`

Reviewer: These are all pretty ugly, but I presume that's intentional. Do we not want users to use local variables? Because that's what we're saying by making them ugly and clumsy.

Author: Is there a beautiful way to make locale variables and not have them be confused with external variables "of the same name"? 

An alternative not presented is the "rope merchant" option: do nothing (ugly or otherwise) and let people adopt whatever convention prevents mistakes, e.g. `$foo` and `#foo` are separate values (external vs. local).

Note: I just recalled that we wanted to use `@` for annotation, so will change that to `#` globally.

Note: if we have separate namespaces then local variables don't
require Unicode names because their namespace is not subject
to external data requirements.

## Alternatives Considered

_What other solutions are available?_
_How do they compare against the requirements?_
_What other properties they have?_

### All Variables are Mutable; Shared Namespace

**This is the current design.**
A declaration can overwrite any passed in (external) value,
either by adding annotation
or by completely replacing the value.
Further, one declaration can modify or completely overwrite a previous annotation.

There are no warnings or errors produced when this occurs, even when it is unintentional.

If variables are mutable and namespaces are shared, it's easy to write a message that never
fails but does produce unintended or unexpected results (from the caller's point of view).

```
{"arg1": "10000"}
...
let $arg1 = {42}

> {This always says {$arg1} == 42}

Reviewer: The proposed design has this same flaw:
```
let @_arg1 = {42}
{This always says {@_arg1} == 42}
```

Anyone not working with MF2 daily will easily forget when looking at that message which prefix is for external and which for internal ones, leading to the exact same failure mode.

Is this the only argument against this alternative?

Author: The proposed design has the matching example in the next block, in which I call out the similarity error. But it isn't "the same flaw". In this case, the declaration completely blocks the original value.

This may not be super terrible. Not having separate namespaces is conceptually simpler and the ability to just annotate via declaration is much easier than doing multiple assignments and teaching developers/translators/etc. about local vs. external vars. Maybe `modify` (however we choose to spell it in the end) solves the "accidental overwrite" problem and is enough?

```

### All Variables are Mutable; Non-shared Namespace

If variables are mutable but namespaces are not shared, its easy for developers or translators to reference the wrong one:

```
{"arg1": "10000"}
...
let #arg1 = {42 :number maxFractionDigits=2}
{This always says {$arg1} == 10000 because it should say {#arg1}}
```

### All Variables are Immutable; Shared Namespace

If we make all variables immutable and external and local vars share a namespace,
passing an argument that shares a name with a local declaration can cause a message to fail.

```
{ "arg1": "37"}
...

> let $arg1 = {|42| :number maxFractionDigits=2}  // error

Reviewer: Not throwing an error for this should be considered a requirement.

Author: In this option, this is an error, because one is attempting to overwrite `$arg1` with a new declaration. Presumably if we chose this option, it would be to **_ensure_** that this was an error.

I happen to agree that there is a use case that needs to be accounted for here (I have made the argument elsewhere many times about declarations not knowing what all the values are externally)

```
{"arg1": "10000"}
...
let $arg1 = {42}
{This always says {$arg1} == 42}
```

### All Variables are Mutable; Non-shared Namespace

If variables are mutable but namespaces are not shared, its easy for developers or translators to reference the wrong one:

```
{"arg1": "10000"}
...
let #arg1 = {42 :number maxFractionDigits=2}
{This always says {$arg1} == 10000 because it should say {#arg1}}
```

### All Variables are Immutable; Shared Namespace

If we make all variables immutable and external and local vars share a namespace,
passing an argument that shares a name with a local declaration can cause a message to fail.

```
{ "arg1": "37"}
...
let $arg1 = {|42| :number maxFractionDigits=2}  // error
```

### All Variables are Immutable; Non-shared Namespace

If we make all variables immutable but external and local vars do not share a namespace,
this problem goes away. However, a local variable cannot be used to augment or annotate an external variable.

```
{ "arg1": "42" }
...
let #arg1 = {$arg1 :number maxFractionDigits=2}
{Now I have to change {$arg} to {#arg}...}
```

### All Variables are Immutable; Externals are Annotatable; Shared Namespace

> _This is @eemelie's proposal from the PR thread_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_This is @eemeli's proposal from the PR thread_
```

# Design Proposal Template

> Status: **Proposed**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status: **Accepted**
```

<details>
	<summary>Variable Namespacing and Mutability</summary>
	<dl>
		<dt>Contributors</dt>

> 		<dd>@aphillips</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		<dd>@aphillips</dd>
		<dd>@eemeli</dd>
```

		<dt>First proposed</dt>
		<dd>2023-09-04</dd>
		<dt>Pull Request</dt>

> 		<dd>#000</dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		<dd><a href="https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/469">#469</a></dd>
```

and provides a way to explicitly declare that a variable is non-local:
`input {$bar}` doesn't require an annotation.

To correspond with "input",
let us also change the local variable declaration keyword to be `local` rather than `let`.

At the syntax/data model level,
`input` or `local` declarations would not be required for all selectors and placeholders,
but a user-configured validator could of course be stricter.

In the ABNF the change would look like this:

```abnf
message = [s] *(declaration [s]) body [s]
declaration = input-declaration / local-declaration

input-declaration = input [s] "{" [s] variable [s annotation] [s] "}"
input = %x69.6E.70.75.74  ; "input"

local-declaration = local s variable [s] "=" [s] expression
local = %x6C.6F.63.61.6C  ; "local"
```

The _expression_ rule can't be used directly in _input-declaration_ because the _variable_ is required.

With this approach, variables are immutable,
so each may be defined by only one _declaration_.
The order of declarations does not matter,
to allow for e.g. `input` annotations to refer to `local` variables.

References to later declarations are not allowed,

> so this is considered an error:

Author: This confuses me. If the order doesn't matter then forward definitions should work, but then you say that they don't (so the order would matter). I think the first paragraph might be a holdover from when you had input followed by local (the new ABNF allows intermixing: intentional?)

Reviewer: We ended up determining that forward-referencing should not be allowed, because if we do allow it, someone not aware of that fact looking at the example message could easily presume that the first `$bar` reference is to an external variable that's shadowed by the `local $bar` declaration.

```
local $foo = {$bar :number}
local $bar = {42 :number}
{The answer is {$foo}}
```

An _input-declaration_ is not required for each external variable.
A _local-declaration_ takes precedence and does not cause an error

> if a similarly named external variable is passed to the formatter

Author: ```suggestion
if an identically named external variable is passed to the formatter
```

similarly is too vague?
